Internationalization
********************

The term of internationalization and localization is an integral part of
application development process. For that reason, TADEK comes with the
:epylink:`tadek.core.locale` module, which provides simple support for
internationalization purpose. The translation machinery is based on `GNU gettext
<http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext>`_ via the `standard gettext module
<http://docs.python.org/library/gettext.html>`_ that comes with Python.
This chapter assumes that the reader have some knowledge of the
internationalization issues.

The :epylink:`tadek.core.locale` module defines two kinds of *gettext()*
functions:

* :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext` and :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.ngettext` -- for  standard (instant) translations,
* :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext__` and :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.ngettext__` -- for lazy translations.

Standard Translation
====================

The TADEK's :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext` and
:epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.ngettext` functions for standard translation have
two goals:

* Marking translatable strings in the code,
* Translating provided strings according to a locale of a given device in the run time.

Because these functions translate specified strings in the run time, they require
the additional *device* argument to determine a target language of a translated
message. That in fact limits usability of the ``gettext()`` standard functions to
test steps, ``setUp()`` and ``tearDown()`` functions.

This example shows a typical use of the :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext`
function in the test step function:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from tadek.engine.testdefs import testStep
    from tadek.models.gcalctool import Calculator
    from tadek.core.locale import gettext as _

    app = Calculator()

    @testStep(description="Calculate a malformed expression")
    def stepCalculateMalformedExpression(test, device):
        test.fail(app.buttons.Calculate.click(device), "Could not calculate result")
        test.fail(app.display.status.hasText(device,
                                             _("Malformed expression", device)),
                  "Incorrect status displayed")

It is convention to use ``gettext()`` functions via the ``'_'`` alias to save
typing (see line 3). In the line 11 the :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext`
function is called with a message to translate and the ``device`` instance
provided to the test step function.

Lazy Translation
================

Sometimes there is a need to only mark strings for translations but not to
translate the strings immediately when the code is executed. To meet this
requirement TADEK comes with functions for lazy translations.
The :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext__` and
:epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.ngettext__` functions mark only specified strings
for future translation, when a target device could be provided for finalizing
the translation.

An ideal place where lazy translation machinery can be used is a model
definition, see the example below:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from tadek.engine.searchers import *
    from tadek.engine.widgets import *
    from tadek.models import Model
    from tadek.core.locale import gettext__ as _

    class Calculator(Model):
        root = App("gcalctool", searcher("AT-SPI"), application("gcalctool"))
        root.define("view", Widget())
        root.define("view.Basic", Widget(frame(_("Calculator"))))
        root.define("view.Advanced",
                    Widget(frame(_("Calculator") + " —" + _(" Advanced"))))
        root.define("view.Financial",
                    Widget(frame(_("Calculator") + " —" + _(" Financial"))))
        root.define("view.Scientific",
                    Widget(frame(_("Calculator") + " —" + _(" Scientific"))))
        root.define("view.Programming",
                    Widget(frame(_("Calculator") + " —" + _(" Programming"))))

In the line 4, again for convenience, the :epylink:`~tadek.core.locale.gettext__`
function is imported as ``'_'``. The function via the ``'_'`` alias is used in
lines: 9-17. The interesting thing in this example is that functions for lazy
translations do not require the ``device`` argument and lazy translated strings
can be concatenated (glued together) with both ordinary strings and other
lazy translated strings.

Creating Language Files
=======================

Once when all strings are tagged for future translation, the language
translations need to be written themselves. TADEK does not provide any tool to
support generating *.po* files and next compiling them to machine-readable *.mo*
binary files. But this is not a problem, since there are external tools, which
can be used for these purposes.

TADEK's translation machinery works properly if all language files, especially
the machine-readable *.mo* files, are placed in the *locale*
:ref:`location <running_locations>` subdirectory and the root parts of
their names (the domain) should be *'tadek'*, e.g. *tadek.po* or *tadek.mo*.

A message file (*.po*) for some language containing tagged strings in specified
Python modules can be generated using the `GNU xgettext
<http://www.gnu.org/s/hello/manual/gettext/xgettext-Invocation.html#xgettext-Invocation>`_
program, e.g.::

    $ xgettext --language=Python --output=locale/pl/LC_MESSAGES/tadek.po \
               models/gcalctool.py teststeps/gcalctool/calculation.py

The generated *tadek.po* file has to be edited to supply a value of ``msgstr``
translation string for each corresponding ``msgid`` string, e.g.::

    #: models/gcalctool.py:55 models/gcalctool.py:58
    msgid "Advanced"
    msgstr "zaawansowany"

After that all messages in the generated *tadek.po* file are translated,
the binary *tadek.mo* can be built with the `GNU msgfmt
<http://www.gnu.org/s/hello/manual/gettext/msgfmt-Invocation.html#msgfmt-Invocation>`_
program, in the following way::

    $ msgfmt --output-file=locale/pl/LC_MESSAGES/tadek.mo \
             locale/pl/LC_MESSAGES/tadek.po
